% LTeX: language=en
\section{Introduction}
\label{sec:intro}

\AP Given a field $\K$ and a set $\X$ of indeterminates, one can consider the
set $\poly{\K}{\X}$ of polynomials over $\K$ in the indeterminates of $\X$. In
this setting, an \intro{ideal} is a non-empty subset of $\poly{\K}{\X}$ that is
closed under addition and multiplication by elements of $\poly{\K}{\X}$. A
fundamental result in algebra is \intro{Hilbert's basis theorem}, which states
whenever $\X$ is finite, the set of polynomials $\poly{\K}{\X}$ is
\intro{Noetherian} \cite{HILB1890}: there are no infinite increasing sequences
$\idl_0 \subsetneq \idl_1 \subsetneq \cdots$ of \kl{ideals} in $\poly{\K}{\X}$.
More generally, one can extend this result to the case where $\K$ is a ring
that is itself \kl{Noetherian}, but we will focus on the easier case of fields.

\AP There are numerous applications of \kl{Hilbert's basis theorem} in algebra,
geometry and computer science. For the latter, the use of the so-called
``Hilbert method'' \cite{BOJAN19,SCHMUDE2021}, which consists of reducing a
combinatorial problem to an ideal membership problem has found numerous
non-trivial applications: from the decidability of the equivalence for
string-to-string transducer models \cite{HONKALA00,BEDUSHWO17}, to the
equivalence of polynomial differential equations \cite{CLEMENTE24}.

\AP There has been a growing interest in the last few years for computational
models that are manipulating infinite data structures in a finite way, for
instance an automaton reading words on the infinite alphabet $\N$, while
maintaining a finite number of states. While this idea can be traced back to
the 90s with the notion of register automata \cite{KAFR94}, it has been revived
in with the development of the theory of \emph{orbit finite sets}. In this
setting, the decidability of the equivalence for \emph{weighted register
automata} has been shown to be decidable \cite{BOKLMO24,BOKLMO21} by leveraging
an analogue of \kl{Hilbert's basis theorem} for vector spaces.

\AP We should mention that the \kl{Hilbert's basis theorem} does not hold for
infinite sets of variables. Let us consider in the rest of this introduction
the (infinite) set $\X$ of variables $\{x_1,x_2,\ldots\}$. The sequence of
ideals $\idl_n = \IdlGen{\setof{x_i}{i \leq n}}$ is both increasing and
infinite, where we used the notation $\intro*\IdlGen{H}$ for the \intro{ideal
generated by} the set $H$, that is the smallest (for inclusion) \kl{ideal}
containing $H$. Yet, one can still consider infinite sets of variables if one
considers them up to the \intro{action of a group} $\group$, which we write
$\group \actson \X$. To continue with our example, we can consider the group of
all monotone injections of $\N$ into itself, which acts on $\X$ by applying the
function to the variable's indices. For instance, $(+1) \in \group$ and $(+1)
\cdot x_1 = x_2$. The action of $\group$ on $\X$ naturally induces an action on
$\poly{\K}{\X}$, by renaming the variables. For instance, the polynomial $5
x_1^2 + x_2$ is sent to $5 x_2^2 + x_3$ by the action of $(+1)$. When
considering subsets $H$ of $\poly{\K}{\X}$, we will be interested in those that
are \intro{equivariant}, i.e., invariant under the action of $\group$: $\group
\cdot H = H$. For instance, Note that the \intro{orbit} of a set $H$, denoted
$\intro*\orbit{H} = \group \cdot H$ is always \kl{equivariant}. In this
setting, we can state an analogue of \kl{Hilbert's basis theorem}: \intro{the
Equivariant Hilbert basis property}, stating that there exists no infinite
increasing sequence of \kl{equivariant} \kl{ideals} in $\poly{\K}{\X}$. Note
that in our example, the \intro{equivariant ideal generated by} $\set{x_1}$,
written $\intro*\EqIdlGen{\set{x_1}}$, already equals $\EqIdlGen{x_1, x_2}$,
since the action of $(+1)$ sends $x_1$ to $x_2$.

\AP The \kl{Equivariant Hilbert basis property} does not hold in general, for
instance if the group $\group$ is the single element group, then
\kl{equivariant} \kl{ideals} are just \kl{ideals}. However, it has been shown
to hold in the case of $\X = \setof{x_i}{i \in \N}$ and $\group$ is the group
of all monotone injections of $\N$ into itself \cite{HIKRLE18}, or in the case
of an infinite set $\X$ and $\group$ is all permutations of $\X$
\cite{BRDR11,HISU12,HIKRLE18}. A generalisation of these results was recently
obtained by \cite{GHOLAS24}, where they almost characterise the pairs
$(\X,\group)$ for which the \kl{Equivariant Hilbert basis property} holds. 

\AP A natural question remains open in this setting: is there a general
decision procedure for the \intro{equivariant ideal membership problem}, that
is, given a finite set $H \in \poly{\K}{\X}$ and a polynomial $p \in
\poly{\K}{\X}$, does $p$ belong to the \kl{equivariant ideal} generated by $H$?
Note that the decidability of the \kl{equivariant ideal membership problem} is
a crucial element in the ``Hilbert method'', and that even in the case of
finite sets of variables, it is already \EXPTIME-complete \cite{MAME82}. In the
finite variables case, a well-known decision procedure is based on the notion
of \kl{Gröbner bases}, which are special generating sets of \kl{ideals} for
which solving the \kl{ideal membership problem} is straightforward. The main
technical part of such procedures is to compute a \kl{Gröbner basis} from a
finite set $H$ of generators, which can be done by using \kl{Buchberger's
algorithm} \cite{BUCH76}, that is closely related to the Knuth-Bendix
completion algorithm \cite{KNBEND70}.

\AP All current decision procedures for the \kl{equivariant ideal membership
problem} are based on the \kl{Gröbner basis} approach, and a suitable
adaptation of \kl{Buchberger's algorithm} to the equivariant case. A crucial
requirement for the success of these techniques is the fact that indeterminates
$\X$ are equipped with a \emph{well-founded} \emph{total} ordering $\leq$ that
is \intro{compatible} with the action of $\group$ on $\X$. This means that if
$x \leq y$, then $\gelem \cdot x \leq \gelem \cdot y$ for all $\gelem \in
\group$. This is a very strong requirement, that is not satisfied in many
cases, for instance when $\X = \setof{x_i}{i \in \Q}$ and $\group$ is the group
of all monotone bijections of $\Q$ into itself, which is a natural example in
many applications \cite{BOKLMO24}.

\paragraph{Contributions.} \AP In this paper, we continue the work of
\cite{GHOLAS24} and show that the \kl{equivariant ideal membership problem} is
decidable under mild assumptions. Let us recall from \cite{GHOLAS24} that a
necessary condition for the \kl{equivariant Hilbert basis property} to hold is
that for every sequence of monomials $\seqof{\monelt_i}[i \in \N]$, there
exists a pair $i < j$ and an element $\gelem \in \group$ such that $\monelt_i$
divides $\gelem \cdot \monelt_j$. Let us recall that a set $(X, \leq)$ is a
\intro{well-quasi-ordering} (WQO) if every infinite sequence $\seqof{x_i}[i \in
\N]$ of elements of $X$ contains a pair $i < j$ such that $x_i \leq x_j$. The
necesarry condition for the \kl{Equivariant Hilbert basis property} to hold can
therefore be rephrased as the fact that the set of monomials $\mon{\X}$ is a
\kl{well-quasi-ordering} when endowed with the \intro{divisibility up-to
$\group$} relation ($\intro*\gdivleq$), which is defined as follows: for
$\monelt_1, \monelt_2 \in \mon{\X}$, we write $\monelt_1 \gdivleq
\monelt_2$ if there exists $\gelem \in \group$ such that $\monelt_1$ divides
$\gelem \cdot \monelt_2$.

\AP In order to state our requirements, let us notice that one can extend the
notion of monomials, that are functions from $\X$ to $\N$ having a finite
support, to the case of $\mon[\alpha]{\X}$, where $\alpha$ is any partially
ordered set. With this convention, $\mon[\omega]{\X} = \mon{\X}$. Note that
divisibility extends to $\mon[\alpha]{\X}$ naturally, and that we can therefore
ask whether $(\mon[\alpha]{\X}, \gdivleq)$ is a \kl{WQO}.

\AP In order to devise a decision procedure, we also need to assume that basic
operations on the set of indeterminates and on the group action are decidable.
Namely, we will assume that the action of $\group$ on $\X$ is
\intro{effectively oligomorphic}, which means that for every two tuples
$(x_1,\dots,x_n), (y_1,\dots,y_n)\in \X^n$, one can decide whether they are in
the same $\group$-orbit, i.e., whether there exists $\gelem \in \group$ such
that $\gelem \cdot x_i = y_i$ for all $i \leq n$. And that for every finite
subset $S \subfin \X$ and every $n \in \N$, one can compute a finite set of
representatives for the $\group_S$-orbits of $\X^n$, where $\group_S$ is the
subgroup of $\group$ that fixes the elements of $S$.

\AP We will also assume that there exists a total ordering $\leq$ on $\X$ that
is \kl{compatible} with the action of $\group$, i.e., if $x \leq y$, but
crucially, we do not assume that $\leq$ is well-founded. To compute with this
ordering, we will assume that one can decide whether $x \leq y$ for all $x,y
\in \X$.

\begin{theorem}
  \label{thm:decide-equiv-ideal-mem}
  Let $(\X, \group, \leq)$ be a set of indeterminates, a group acting \kl{effectively
  oligomorphically}
  on $\X$ and an
  \kl{effective total ordering} $\leq$ on $\X$ that is compatible with the action of
  $\group$. 
  If $(\mon[\omega + 1]{\X}, \gdivleq)$ is a \kl{WQO}, then one can decide the
  \kl{equivariant ideal membership problem}.
\end{theorem}

\AP
We also show that one can compute an \kl{equivariant Gröbner basis}
from a finite set $H$ of generators, whenever one has 
slightly more control on the divisibility relation $\gdivleq$.

\todo[inline]{
  Define what a Gröbner basis is in general, and 
  what it means in the equivariant case.
  The definition of \cite{GHOLAS24}
  depends on leading monomials + well-founded
  ordering, and should therefore be avoided here 
  for clarity
}

\begin{theorem}
  \label{thm:decide-equiv-ideal-mem}
  Let $(\X, \group, \leq)$ be a set of indeterminates, a group acting \kl{effectively
  oligomorphically}
  on $\X$ and an
  \kl{effective total ordering} $\leq$ on $\X$ that is compatible with the action of
  $\group$. 
  If $(\mon[\omega + \omega]{\X}, \gdivleq)$ is a \kl{WQO}, then one can
  compute an \kl{equivariant Gröbner basis} from a finite set $H$ of generators.
\end{theorem}

